Create ML README.md (#11848)
netdata/netdata: ml/README.md

For example, here are some recent raw dimension values for `system.ip` on our [london](http://london.my-netdata.io/) demo server:

[`https://london.my-netdata.io/api/v1/data?chart=system.ip`](https://london.my-netdata.io/api/v1/data?chart=system.ip)

```
{
 "labels": ["time", "received", "sent"],
    "data":
 [
      [ 1638365672, 54.84098, -76.70201],
      [ 1638365671, 124.4328, -309.7543],
      [ 1638365670, 123.73152, -167.9056],
      ...
 ]
}
```

And if we add the `&options=anomaly-bit` params, we can see the "anomaly bit" value corresponding to each raw dimension value: 

[`https://london.my-netdata.io/api/v1/data?chart=system.ip&options=anomaly-bit`](https://london.my-netdata.io/api/v1/data?chart=system.ip&options=anomaly-bit)

```
{
 "labels": ["time", "received", "sent"],
    "data":
 [
      [ 1638365672, 0, 0],
      [ 1638365671, 0, 0],
      [ 1638365670, 0, 0],
      ...
 ]
}
```

Typically, the anomaly bit will mostly be 0 under normal circumstances with some random fluctuations every now and then to 100. Although this very much depends on the nature of the dimension in question.

> ### Anomaly Rate - avg(anomaly bit)

Reviewer: Is there a specific reason to use 'avg' instead of average?

Author: nope, updated

### Anomaly Detector - Node level anomaly events

Netdata uses the concept of an ["anomaly detector"](#anomaly-detector) that looks at all the anomaly bits of the node and if a sufficient percentage of them are high enough for a persistent amount of time then an ["anomaly event"](#anomaly-event) will be produced. This anomaly event signals that there was sufficient evidence among all the anomaly bits that some strange behavior might have been detected in a more global sense across the node.

Essentially if the ["Node Anomaly Rate"](#node-anomaly-rate) (NAR) passes a defined threshold and stays above that threshold for a persistent amount of time a "Node [Anomaly Event](#anomaly-event)" will be triggered.

These anomaly events are currently exposed via `/api/v1/anomaly_events`

> https://london.my-netdata.io/api/v1/anomaly_events?after=1638365182000&before=1638365602000

Reviewer: I clicked the link and it just showed an empty object: `[]`.
Can you double check that the link works as intended? 
Can you also give a short statement what the reader can expect when clicking on the link?

Author: yep, added a note just after it. Basically it's usually going to be `[]` to signal no anomaly events within the window.

If an event exists within the window the result would be a list of start and end time's

```

> [

Reviewer: Is this a list of start and end times?

Author: yep - a list of lists really as can have more than one event in the window, they just wont overlap.

Reviewer 2: Can we move the note above the link?

    [
        1638367788,
        1638367851
    ]
]
```

Where information about each anomaly event can then be found at the `/api/v1/anomaly_event_info` endpoint (making sure to pass the `after` and `before` params): 

> https://london.my-netdata.io/api/v1/anomaly_event_info?after=1638367788&before=1638367851

Reviewer: I clicked on the link and it returned `null`

Author: yep - is expected - added a note to try make it clearer that the response is meant to be illustrative for cases where you would have an event. unfortunately the data on london demo will be deleted over time so cant really provide a link that will always return a known anomaly event.

```
[
    [
        0.66,
        "netdata.response_time|max"
    ],
    [
        0.63,
        "netdata.response_time|average"
    ],
    [
        0.54,
        "netdata.requests|requests"
    ],
    ...
```

This returns a list of dimension anomaly rates for all dimensions that were considered part of the detected anomaly event.

**Note**: We plan to build additional anomaly detection and exploration features into both Netdata Agent and Netdata Cloud and so these endpoints are primarily to power these features and so still under active development.

> ## Configuration

Reviewer: Maybe you have more info on the typical location of the config file?

Author: yep makese sense - added a link to here: https://learn.netdata.cloud/guides/step-by-step/step-04

# Machine learning (ML) powered anomaly detection

## Overview

> As of [`v1.32.0`](https://github.com/netdata/netdata/releases/tag/v1.32.0) Netdata comes with some ML powered [anomaly detection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anomaly_detection) capabilities built into it and available to use out of the box with minimal configuration required.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As of [`v1.32.0`](https://github.com/netdata/netdata/releases/tag/v1.32.0), Netdata comes with some ML powered [anomaly detection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anomaly_detection) capabilities built into it and available to use out of the box, with minimal configuration required.
```

> 🚧 **Note**: This functionality is still under active development and considered experimental. Changes might cause the feature to break. We dogfood it internally and among early adopters within the Netdata community to build the feature. If you would like to get involved and help us with some feedback please feel free to email us at analytics-ml-team@netdata.cloud or come join us in the [🤖-ml-powered-monitoring](https://discord.gg/4eRSEUpJnc) channel of the Netdata discord.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
🚧 **Note**: This functionality is still under active development and considered experimental. Changes might cause the feature to break. We dogfood it internally and among early adopters within the Netdata community to build the feature. If you would like to get involved and help us with some feedback, email us at analytics-ml-team@netdata.cloud or come join us in the [🤖-ml-powered-monitoring](https://discord.gg/4eRSEUpJnc) channel of the Netdata discord.
```

> Once ML is enabled, Netdata will begin training a model for each dimension. By default this model is a [k-means clustering](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/K-means_clustering) model trained on the most recent 4 hours of data. Rather than just using the most recent value of each raw metric, the model works on a preprocessed ["feature vector"](#feature-vector) of recent smoothed and differenced values. This should enable the model to detect a wider range of potentially anomalous patterns in recent observations as opposed to just point anomalies like big spikes or drops ([this infographic](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2178292/144414415-275a3477-5b47-43d6-8959-509eb48ebb20.png) shows some different types of anomalies). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once ML is enabled, Netdata will begin training a model for each dimension. By default this model is a [k-means clustering](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/K-means_clustering) model trained on the most recent 4 hours of data. Rather than just using the most recent value of each raw metric, the model works on a preprocessed ["feature vector"](#feature-vector) of recent smoothed and differenced values. This should enable the model to detect a wider range of potentially anomalous patterns in recent observations as opposed to just point anomalies like big spikes or drops. ([This infographic](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2178292/144414415-275a3477-5b47-43d6-8959-509eb48ebb20.png) shows some different types of anomalies.) 
```

This ["anomaly bit"](#anomaly-bit) is exposed via the `anomaly-bit` key that can be passed to the `options` param of the `/api/v1/data` REST API. 

For example, here are some recent raw dimension values for `system.ip` on our [london](http://london.my-netdata.io/) demo server:

[`https://london.my-netdata.io/api/v1/data?chart=system.ip`](https://london.my-netdata.io/api/v1/data?chart=system.ip)

```
{
 "labels": ["time", "received", "sent"],
    "data":
 [
      [ 1638365672, 54.84098, -76.70201],
      [ 1638365671, 124.4328, -309.7543],
      [ 1638365670, 123.73152, -167.9056],
      ...
 ]
}
```

And if we add the `&options=anomaly-bit` params, we can see the "anomaly bit" value corresponding to each raw dimension value: 

[`https://london.my-netdata.io/api/v1/data?chart=system.ip&options=anomaly-bit`](https://london.my-netdata.io/api/v1/data?chart=system.ip&options=anomaly-bit)

```
{
 "labels": ["time", "received", "sent"],
    "data":
 [
      [ 1638365672, 0, 0],
      [ 1638365671, 0, 0],
      [ 1638365670, 0, 0],
      ...
 ]
}
```

> Typically, the anomaly bit will mostly be 0 under normal circumstances with some random fluctuations every now and then to 100. Although this very much depends on the nature of the dimension in question.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Typically, the anomaly bit will mostly be 0 under normal circumstances, with some random fluctuations every now and then to 100, although this very much depends on the nature of the dimension in question.
```

2. In the `[ml]` section, set `enabled = yes`.
3. Restart netdata (typically `sudo systemctl restart netdata`).

**Note**: If you would like to learn more about configuring Netdata please see [this guide](https://learn.netdata.cloud/guides/step-by-step/step-04).

Below is a list of all the available configuration params and their default values.

```
[ml]
	# enabled = no
	# maximum num samples to train = 14400
	# minimum num samples to train = 3600
	# train every = 3600
	# num samples to diff = 1
	# num samples to smooth = 3
	# num samples to lag = 5
	# maximum number of k-means iterations = 1000
	# dimension anomaly score threshold = 0.99
	# host anomaly rate threshold = 0.01000
	# minimum window size = 30.00000
	# maximum window size = 600.00000
	# idle window size = 30.00000
	# window minimum anomaly rate = 0.25000
	# anomaly event min dimension rate threshold = 0.05000
	# hosts to skip from training = !*
	# charts to skip from training = !system.* !cpu.* !mem.* !disk.* !disk_* !ip.* !ipv4.* !ipv6.* !net.* !net_* !netfilter.* !services.* !apps.* !groups.* !user.* !ebpf.* !netdata.* *
```

### Descriptions (min/max)

- `enabled`: `yes` to enable, `no` to disable.

> - `maximum num samples to train`: (`3600`/`21600`) This is the maximum amount of time you would like to train each model on. For example, the default of `14400` would train on the preceding 4 hours of data assuming an `update every` of 1 second.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `maximum num samples to train`: (`3600`/`21600`) This is the maximum amount of time you would like to train each model on. For example, the default of `14400` trains on the preceding 4 hours of data, assuming an `update every` of 1 second.
```

> - `minimum num samples to train`: (`900`/`21600`) This is the minimum amount of data required to be able to train a model. For example, the default of `3600` implies that once at least 1 hour of data is available for training a model will be trained, otherwise it will be skipped and checked again at the next training run.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `minimum num samples to train`: (`900`/`21600`) This is the minimum amount of data required to be able to train a model. For example, the default of `3600` implies that once at least 1 hour of data is available for training, a model is trained, otherwise it is skipped and checked again at the next training run.
```

> - `train every`: (`1800`/`21600`) This is how often each model will be retrained. For example, the default of `3600` means that each model will be retrained every hour. Note: the training of all models is spread out across the `train every` period for efficiency so in reality it means that each model will be trained in a staggered manner within each `train every` period.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `train every`: (`1800`/`21600`) This is how often each model will be retrained. For example, the default of `3600` means that each model is retrained every hour. Note: The training of all models is spread out across the `train every` period for efficiency, so in reality, it means that each model will be trained in a staggered manner within each `train every` period.
```

> - `num samples to diff`: (`0`/`1`) This is a `0` or `1` to determine if you want the model to operate on differences of the raw data or just the raw data. For example, the default of `1` means that we take differences of the raw values. Using differences is more general and works on dimensions that might naturally tend to have some trends or cycles in them that is normal behavior we don't want to be too sensitive to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `num samples to diff`: (`0`/`1`) This is a `0` or `1` to determine if you want the model to operate on differences of the raw data or just the raw data. For example, the default of `1` means that we take differences of the raw values. Using differences is more general and works on dimensions that might naturally tend to have some trends or cycles in them that is normal behavior to which we don't want to be too sensitive.
```

- `num samples to smooth`: (`0`/`5`) This is a small integer that controls the amount of smoothing applied as part of the feature processing used by the model. For example, the default of `3` means that the rolling average of the last 3 values is used. Smoothing like this helps the model be a little more robust to spiky types of dimensions that naturally "jump" up or down as part of their normal behavior.
- `num samples to lag`: (`0`/`5`) This is a small integer that determines how many lagged values of the dimension to include in the feature vector. For example, the default of `5` means that in addition to the most recent (by default, differenced and smoothed) value of the dimension, the feature vector will also include the 5 previous values too. Using lagged values in our feature representation allows the model to work over strange patterns over recent values of a dimension as opposed to just focusing on if the most recent value itself is big or small enough to be anomalous.

> - `maximum number of k-means iterations`: A parameter that can be passed to the model to limit the number of iterations in training the k-means model. Vast majority of cases can ignore and leave as default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `maximum number of k-means iterations`: This is a parameter that can be passed to the model to limit the number of iterations in training the k-means model. Vast majority of cases can ignore and leave as default.
```

> - `dimension anomaly score threshold`: (`0.01`/`5.00`) This is the threshold at which an individual dimension at a specific timestep is considered anomalous or not. For example, the default of `0.99` means that a dimension with an anomaly score of 99% or higher will be flagged as anomalous. This is a normalized probability based on the training data, so the default of 99% means that anything that is as strange (based on distance measure) or more as the most strange 1% of data observed during training will be flagged as anomalous. If you wanted to make the anomaly detection on individual dimensions more sensitive you could try a value like `0.90` (90%) or to make it less sensitive you could try `1.5` (150%).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `dimension anomaly score threshold`: (`0.01`/`5.00`) This is the threshold at which an individual dimension at a specific timestep is considered anomalous or not. For example, the default of `0.99` means that a dimension with an anomaly score of 99% or higher is flagged as anomalous. This is a normalized probability based on the training data, so the default of 99% means that anything that is as strange (based on distance measure) or more strange as the most strange 1% of data observed during training will be flagged as anomalous. If you wanted to make the anomaly detection on individual dimensions more sensitive you could try a value like `0.90` (90%) or to make it less sensitive you could try `1.5` (150%).
```

> - `host anomaly rate threshold`: (`0.0`/`1.0`) The is the percentage of dimensions (based on all those enabled for anomaly detection) that need to be considered anomalous at specific timestep for the host itself to be considered anomalous. For example, the default value of `0.01` means that if more than 1% of dimensions are anomalous at the same time then the host itself is considered in an anomalous state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `host anomaly rate threshold`: (`0.0`/`1.0`) This is the percentage of dimensions (based on all those enabled for anomaly detection) that need to be considered anomalous at specific timestep for the host itself to be considered anomalous. For example, the default value of `0.01` means that if more than 1% of dimensions are anomalous at the same time then the host itself is considered in an anomalous state.
```

> - `minimum window size`: The netdata "Anomaly Detector" logic works over a rolling window of data. This parameter defines the minimum length of window to consider. If over this window the host is in an anomalous state then an anomaly detection event will be triggered. For example, the default of `30` means that the detector will initially work over a rolling window of 30 seconds. Note: The length of this window will be dynamic once an anomaly event has been triggered such that it will expand as needed until either the max length of an anomaly event is hit or the host settles back into a normal state with sufficiently decreased host level anomaly states in the rolling window. Note: If you wanted to adjust the higher level anomaly detector behavior then this is one parameter you might adjust to see the impact of on anomaly detection events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `minimum window size`: The Netdata "Anomaly Detector" logic works over a rolling window of data. This parameter defines the minimum length of window to consider. If over this window the host is in an anomalous state then an anomaly detection event will be triggered. For example, the default of `30` means that the detector will initially work over a rolling window of 30 seconds. Note: The length of this window will be dynamic once an anomaly event has been triggered such that it will expand as needed until either the max length of an anomaly event is hit or the host settles back into a normal state with sufficiently decreased host level anomaly states in the rolling window. Note: If you wanted to adjust the higher level anomaly detector behavior then this is one parameter you might adjust to see the impact of on anomaly detection events.
```

> - `maximum window size`: This parameter defines the maximum length of window to consider. If an anomaly event reaches this size it will be closed. This is to provide a upper bound on the length of an anomaly event and cost of the anomaly detector logic for that event.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `maximum window size`: This parameter defines the maximum length of window to consider. If an anomaly event reaches this size, it will be closed. This is to provide an upper bound on the length of an anomaly event and cost of the anomaly detector logic for that event.
```

> - `window minimum anomaly rate`: (`0.0`/`1.0`) The parameter corresponds to a threshold on the percentage of time in the rolling window that the host was considered in an anomalous state. For example, the default of `0.25` means that if the host is in an anomalous state for 25% of more of the rolling window then and anomaly event will be triggered or extended if one is already active. Note: If you wanted to make the anomaly detector itself less sensitive the you could adjust this value to something like `0.75` which would mean the host needs to be much more consistently in an anomalous state to trigger an anomaly detection event. Likewise a lower value like `0.1` would make the anomaly detector more sensitive.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `window minimum anomaly rate`: (`0.0`/`1.0`) This parameter corresponds to a threshold on the percentage of time in the rolling window that the host was considered in an anomalous state. For example, the default of `0.25` means that if the host is in an anomalous state for 25% of more of the rolling window then and anomaly event will be triggered or extended if one is already active. Note: If you want to make the anomaly detector itself less sensitive, you can adjust this value to something like `0.75` which would mean the host needs to be much more consistently in an anomalous state to trigger an anomaly detection event. Likewise, a lower value like `0.1` would make the anomaly detector more sensitive.
```

- `anomaly event min dimension rate threshold`: (`0.0`/`1.0`) This is a parameter that helps filter out irrelevant dimensions from anomaly events. For example, the default of `0.05` means that only dimensions that were considered anomalous for at least 5% of the anomaly event itself will be included in that anomaly event. The idea here is to just include dimensions that were consistently anomalous as opposed to those that may have just randomly happened to be anomalous at the same time.

> - `hosts to skip from training`: If you would like to turn off anomaly detection for any child hosts on a parent host you can define those you would like to skip from training here. For example a value like `dev-*` would skip all hosts on a parent that begin with the "dev-" prefix. The default value of `!*` means "don't skip any".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `hosts to skip from training`: This parameter allows you to turn off anomaly detection for any child hosts on a parent host by defining those you would like to skip from training here. For example, a value like `dev-*` skips all hosts on a parent that begin with the "dev-" prefix. The default value of `!*` means "don't skip any".
```

> - `charts to skip from training`: If you would like to exclude certain charts from anomaly detection then you can define them here. By default all charts apart from a specific allow list of the typical basic netdata charts are excluded. If you have additional charts you would like to include for anomaly detection then you can add them here. **Note**: It is recommended to add charts in small groups and then measure any impact on performance before adding additional ones.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `charts to skip from training`: This parameter allows you to exclude certain charts from anomaly detection by defining them here. By default, all charts, apart from a specific allow list of the typical basic Netdata charts, are excluded. If you have additional charts you would like to include for anomaly detection, you can add them here. **Note**: It is recommended to add charts in small groups and then measure any impact on performance before adding additional ones.
```

## Charts

> One enabled, the "Anomaly Detection" menu and charts will be available on the dashboard.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once enabled, the "Anomaly Detection" menu and charts will be available on the dashboard.
```

![anomaly_detection_menu](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2178292/144255721-4568aabf-39c7-4855-bf1c-31b1d60e28e6.png)

> In terms of anomaly detection, the most interesting charts would be the `anomaly_detection.dimensions` and `anomaly_detection.anomaly_rate` ones which hold the `anomalous` and `anomaly_rate` dimensions that show the overall number of dimensions considered anomalous at any time and the corresponding anomaly rate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In terms of anomaly detection, the most interesting charts would be the `anomaly_detection.dimensions` and `anomaly_detection.anomaly_rate` ones, which hold the `anomalous` and `anomaly_rate` dimensions that show the overall number of dimensions considered anomalous at any time and the corresponding anomaly rate.
```

- `anomaly_detection.dimensions`: Percentage of anomalous dimensions.
- `anomaly_detection.detector_window`: The length of the active window used by the detector.
- `anomaly_detection.detector_events`: Flags (0 or 1) to show when an anomaly event has been triggered by the detector.
- `anomaly_detection.prediction_stats`: Diagnostic metrics relating to prediction time of anomaly detection.
- `anomaly_detection.training_stats`: Diagnostic metrics relating to training time of anomaly detection.

Below is an example of how these charts may look in the presence of an anomaly event.

Initially we see a jump in `anomalous` dimensions:

![anomalous](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2178292/144256036-c89fa768-5e5f-4278-9725-c67521c0d95e.png)

And a corresponding jump in the `anomaly_rate`:

![anomaly_rate](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2178292/144256071-7d157438-31f3-4b23-a795-0fd3b2e2e85c.png)

After a short while the rolling node anomaly rate goes `above_threshold`, and once it stays above threshold for long enough a `new_anomaly_event` is created:

![anomaly_event](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2178292/144256152-910b06ec-26b8-45b4-bcb7-4c2acdf9af15.png)

> ## Glossary

Reviewer: Does the sorting of the entries follow a certain logic? Intuitively, I would sort the glossary entries alphabetically.

Author: yep - good idea ill sort alpha

Author: oh actually, feature vector -> anomaly score -> anomaly bit -> anomaly rate -> anomaly detector -> anomaly event

actually does have a conceptual flow from smallest building block up to final node anomaly event.
